[Music]
it was a cold rainy day in October of
Great Falls of hail crashed into the
ground in short it wasn't a good day to
fly and wow air flight 404 headed from
Reykjavik Iceland to Paris France would
soon understand why that iconic fuchsia
coloured plane was struck by a massive
bolt of lightning not long after taking
off but did she go down you'd think so
given that a single lightning bolt
carries 1 billion volts of electric
force with it that's enough to power a
60 watt light bulb for half a year but
it doesn't end there lightning is five
times hotter than the surface of the Sun
so when it strikes the air around the
bulk eats up faster than the speed of
sound the result an ear-shattering crack
of thunder that sounds more like a
nearby explosion and they don't call it
lightning for nothing the light is
almost blinding when you're dangerously
close to a strike hey speaking of which
what's the craziest weather you've ever
seen let me know down in the comments
anyway
lightning is one powerful force of
Mother Nature so just imagine being on a
flight and all that happening to the
plane I'm almost too afraid to find out
what the damage would look like an
exterior burnt black like a piece of
coal a shredded fuselage a fire on board
nope nope and negative surprisingly
lightning doesn't do much damage to
aircraft for one thing lightning doesn't
hit airplanes all that often these days
security rules don't allow pilots to fly
into a storm front the plane should go
around a thundercloud but never above or
under it
first of all they don't usually fly over
them since the cloud tops can rise too
high and if they fly below it lightning
will hit the plane for sure I mean it's
a hunk of pure metal moving through the
air what would you expect but they're
able to avoid storms thanks to special
onboard weather radars ok but if a
lightning strike doesn't bring a plane
down or do any threatening damage
then why do they avoid storms well it's
not because of the lightning itself but
extreme turbulence that might happen
inside a storm turbulence can cause
serious troubles including loss of
control over the aircraft the shaking
can also cause heavy bags to fall out of
the overhead bins and possibly hurt
someone that's why the rule is that
plane should never get closer than 20
miles to the center of a storm it's
marked red on the radar sometimes pilots
have to diverge from the road for dozens
of miles just to avoid this heavy
turbulence as it is now with the
existing safety rules in place lightning
hits a plane one to two times a year if
the aircraft is used regularly but even
then it doesn't usually lead to any
serious circumstances pilots can face
lightning strikes once every 3000 hours
in the air that's about one time in
several years of working in commercial
aviation passengers spend much less time
in the air so it's highly unlikely that
they'll board the plane and go through
what those folks headed from Iceland to
France got to witness out of 3000 plane
related incidents since 2000 only eight
of them were caused by lightning strikes
okay that one's clear it's not as if
lightning hits airplanes daily but when
it does strike how are jumbo jets
protected from it retired pilot Chris
Hammond explains that before an aircraft
goes into service it gets tested for all
possible incidents that includes a
lightning strike simulation when they
just started using composite materials
for the plane skin switching from the
old aluminum exteriors they would fly
into storm clouds on purpose to make
sure that the new material is just as
safe as Hammond says the pictures and
videos of that Iceland lightning strike
show exactly how everything should work
the bolt usually hits the plane in the
area of its nose and leaves near the
tail and partially through the wings it
does that because it chooses the path of
least resistance like between me and the
cookie jar rather it goes along the
planes metal skin but doesn't get inside
or damage any important parts now the
planes are covered not
with pure aluminum but with composite
materials they get a special layer of a
conductive mesh made from copper foil
the mesh looks like an electrically
conductive canvas covering the plain
skin
in short the aircraft becomes one giant
Faraday cage that's a special mechanism
that English physicist and inventor
Michael Faraday created way back in 1836
to protect devices from electromagnetic
radiation the cage is still used for the
same purpose and works quite simply when
an outer electromagnetic field acts upon
the cage free electrons and it's metal
start moving that charge gets
redistributed around the cages exterior
and cancels any radiation that tries to
get to the interior but protecting
airplanes from lightning doesn't end
with the exterior materials the internal
systems and cables are also covered with
copper meshes the fuel tanks get filled
with a neutral gas so that they don't
catch on fire and finally to lower the
chances of coming into a lightning bolts
path there are special static
eliminators installed at the wings edges
static discharge flows off of them and
out into the air thanks to that the
plane always stays neutrally charged and
doesn't attract lightning in the first
place in case lightning does hit it'll
likely leave through the static
eliminator some minor damage to the skin
radio or electronic devices might happen
but that's not really an urgent issue
since all the critical devices are
duplicated onboard each plane but like I
said even aircraft of the newest designs
are forbidden to fly into a storm front
after all 96% of all cases even if they
are rare happened when the plane is
inside a storm cloud if a strike did
happen
pilots check all the systems if anything
goes wrong they land the plane at the
nearest airport on the way as for the
case of those passengers on board that
wild flight the aircraft just continued
on to its destination and landed safely
in Paris 3 and a half hours later gee
did the passengers all say wow
and if that doesn't convince you in 2015
a different plane flying from Reykjavik
got struck by lightning and made it all
the way to its destination in Denver
Colorado I think the takeaway here is to
avoid lightning hitting your plane don't
fly out of Reykjavik
am I wrong of course even if the flight
makes it to the destination and
everything seems okay
technicians still carefully examine the
aircraft once it's on the ground to see
if there's any micro damage to its skin
spots where the lightning entered and
exited the planes exterior usually look
like small melted holes no more than a
half an inch in diameter they can be
fixed very quickly sounds easy enough
what airlines lose millions of dollars
because of flight delays caused by these
safety measures at least now you know
that sometimes you have to wait longer
for a good reason but can passengers
notice anything on board during this
impromptu light show sure you can hear a
loud strike and see flashes outside the
plank
the aircraft might even shake a bit with
all that energy and force going on
outside but this is a standard situation
that poses no danger to the flight
lightning usually looks more frightening
when you see it on the ground and not on
board the plane Hammond as an
experienced pilot himself recalls that
at the beginning of his career lightning
struck his plane as he was coming into
San Francisco the cockpit went black as
all the monitors shut down sounds
terrifying right well like all airplanes
his was equipped with analog flight
control devices while the systems were
coming back to life Hammond managed to
land the aircraft manually talk about
skill and keeping a cool head so now you
know that lightning is not a problem in
modern aviation a lot of design
solutions protect airplanes from any
severe damage and the risk of getting
into an accident caused by lightning is
next to zero in fact the biggest risk
caused by a lightning strike other than
any turbulence going on out in that
storm is that passengers who notice it
can get scared and start panicking but
now you know there's no need for that so
keep calm and fly
I say or do what I do and hide in the
bathroom yeah just kidding hey if you
learn something new today then give the
video a like and share with a friend and
here are some other cool videos I think
you'll enjoy just click to the left or
right and remember stay on the bright
side of life